= IPv6 =

IPv6 is the protocol meant to replace IPv4, overcoming its limitations and with the introduction of features, it was developed from mid/late 90', the most noticeable aspect is the 128-bit address space that gives 340 *undecillion* addresses. Of course IPv6 is not just _more addresses_ and hexadecimal representation but introduces numerous features: 

	* Stateless configuration
	* end-to-end reachability without private addresses and NAT
	* better support for mobility
	* easier peer-to-peer networking

== Why IPv6? ==

The major reason of because we need IPv6 is that we are running out of IPv4 address space, already in 2011 IANA allocated the last /8 IPv4 address block to the RIRs, and as we can see on [[https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm|Internet World Stats]] regions with largest populations have the lowest percentages of people connected to the internet: we need more addresses. 

A temporary patch that We still use is NAT. NAT has been used to _hide_ customers of ISP exposing just one public address for customer. NAT, however, creates issues with peer-to-peer networks and limits the access to our _hidden_ systems from other networks. 

== IPv6 Address Representation ==

4 bits can be represented with just one hexadecimal digit. Each IPv6 address is composed by 8 _hextets_ (group of 16-bit so 4 hexadecimal digits) divided by a *:*. Two rules have to be followed when writing an IPv6 address:

	1. leading 0s can be omitted, but trailing 0s must be included, for example:

{{{
2001:0DB8:0001:1000:0010:0100:0EF0:BC00

2001: DB8:   1:1000:  10: 100: EF0:BC00
}}}

	2. any single, contiguous string of one or more 16-bit segments of all zeros can be represented with a double colon (*::*)

{{{
2001:0DB8:0001:0000:0000:0000:0EF0:BC00

2001:0DB8:0001:              :0EF0:BC00
}}}

== IPv6 Addresses Type ==

There are multiple types of IPv6 addresses, and each of them has it's scope. We can categorize them as follows:

	* Unicast
		- [[#Global Unicast Address|Global Unicast]] (*2000::/3*)
		- Link Local (*FE80::/10*)
		- Loopback (*::1/128*)
		- Unspecified (*::/128*)
		- Unique Local (*FC00::/7*)
		- Embedded IPv4 (*::/80*)
	* Multicast
		- Assigned (*FF00::/8*)
		- Solicited Node (*FF02::1:FF00:0000/104*)
	* Anycast

As We can see in IPv6  there isn't the concept of broadcast address. In a IPv6 header (more on this) the *Source address* is always unicast (link-local or GUA), the *Destination address* can be Unicast, Multicast or Anycast.

=== Global Unicast Address ===

GUAs are globally unique and routable, they have the same purpose of IPv4 public addresses, and they range from: *2000::/3* to *3FFF::/3*. They represent $\frac{1}{8}$ of the IPv6 address space.

We start from *2000::* fixing the first 3 *bits* so:

{{{
_001_0 0000 0000 0000 ::
}}}

and we can go up to:

{{{
_001_1 1111 1111 1111 ::
}}}


