= Footprinting =

Footprinting is the first phase an attacker has to perform before starting the real attack. Footprinting is the action of gather useful informations about the target without interacting directly with it. The systematic and methodical footprinting  of an organization enables the attacker to create a near complete profile picture of the organization's security. 

Footprinting is performed using different tools and techniques and it's performed in different sub-phases, and can lead to reduce an organization to a specific range of domain names, networks blocks, subnets, routers and IP addresses.It's important to perform the footprinting of your own organization, to be able to know what the hacker sees, and if you know what informations he can see you know what are the potential security exposures present.

The steps to correctly perform an Internet Fooprinting are: 

	* Determine scope of your activities
	* Get proper authorization (this phase is performed only by ethical hackers of course)
	* Publicly available information
	* WHOIS and DNS Enumeration
	* DNS Interrogation
	* Network Reconnaissance

== Determine the scope of your activities ==

The first thing to do is to determine which are the boundaries of the footprinting activity.

== Get proper authorization ==

It's fundamental to make sure to have all the proper authorizations to perform fooprinting and following phases as an Ethical Hacker.

== Publicly available information ==

There is a huge amount of public information that regards many aspect of an organization, and this kind of informations can be used to pursue Social Engineering and phishing attacks. The first place useful to retrieve public information on a given target is, obviously, the target Web Page.

=== Company Web Page ===

Sometimes a website provides excessive amounts of information that can aid attackers, and sometimes informations that are not meant to be public are just buried in HTML comment inside the pages, so an offline analysis of the website source code can lead to useful informations. Some tools that can be used for mirror websites are: `wget` (UNIX) and `Teleport Pro` on Windows. 

It's important to know that not all the files are indexed by search engines, brute-force techniques can be used to enumerate all the content on a web server; `DirBuster` is a tool that can automatically enumerate hidden files and directories of a given web server. Of course this kind of brute-force enumeration is extremely noisy. 

Another source of useful informations is the other websites beyond the main `http://www.` and `https://www.` in fact hostnames such as: `www1`, `test1`, `owa` or `outlook` can contain resources to handle the access to internal resources via a web browser. A lot of companies use VPNs, so sites like `vpn.something.org` can reveals useful informations about the VPN vendor and software, how to download and setup the VPN client, and contact informations of technical support. 

=== Related Organizations ===

It's important to look out for links or references to other organizations that are related to the target. Find informations about related organizations is important because sometimes even if the target is strict on which informations are posted, its partners are not as security-minded. Related organizations can reveal additional details. 

=== Location Details ===

Real life location details can be used by an attacker to pursue a social engineering attack or to gather more informations through dumpster diving and surveillance, and in some cases can lead to an authorized access to the buildings. Famous web services, like google map street view, record and track any WiFi network SSID and their associate MAC address. This kind of information can be used to triangulate the location of an individual with precision ([[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fWk_rMQiDGc|more on this]]). 

=== Employee Informations ===

Contact names and e-mail addresses are very useful informations for an hacker to known when trying to access to system resources, perform a social engineering attack or to obtain other info; for example telephone numbers can lead to physical address. Personal details can be gathered using social media, career management sites and family ancestry sites. There are also payed services like `jigsaw.com` which purpose is to sell employee information for market reasons. Given enough informations, attackers can build a matrix of data points that can lead to reveal much of the target's configuration and vulnerabilities. Data mining tools like `maltego` can sifting trough a lot of information sources and draw relationship maps between all the data point collected.

Employees CVs and Job requests are another source of interesting informations, they can include sensitive informations about technologies and software used for security, network management and so on. Another real treat for an organization is represented by ex-employees that can distribute sensitive informations about the internal organization. 
